Let’s say that we are walking on the street and we see that some construction workers are building a brick house. And assume that we love watching construction sites.

While watching, we see that one of the bricks drops from the roof, and it is about to hit the head of a squirrel in front of us that is busy eating nuts.

The patterns of these different events that create a coherent context (1) walking on the street, 2) seeing the construction workers, 3) seeing their clothes, 4) seeing a squirrel near a tree on the sidewalk, 5) surprising that it doesn’t fear among all these people and crowd 6) seeing a brick coming off the roof, and 7) our prediction that the brick will most likely hit the squirrel) are stored in different cortical regions, and the patterns that represent each of these events in different cortical regions are connected in the hippocampus.

In other words, the hippocampus stores some kind of pointer that is associated with the connections that were active while we were experiencing this particular coherent event. It acts as an indexing system that links distributed cortical representations.

And once this pointer/index is activated strongly enough years later, the patterns that represent the sequential events are reactivated because those patterns were connected to this index in the hippocampus, and that’s when the person remembers the whole event. We call this episodic memory because we remember the context, unlike semantic memory. That’s why the hippocampus plays an important role in long-term memory.

However, as far as I have read, this may not be the case throughout our entire lifetime. It seems like there is still no consensus about this, but one proposed argument is that as we remember episodic experiences over and over again, the connections between cortical regions become stronger because of the “fire together, wire together” rule, while the connections between the cortical regions and the link/pointer in the hippocampus become weaker over time.

Additionally, during sleep, short, fast bursts of electrical activity occur in the hippocampus, and this activity reactivates the neurons that act like a pointer and that are connected to distributed cortical representations in the hippocampus. This way, the patterns associated with the episodic memories are copied from the hippocampus to cortical regions, they are represented in these regions more strongly, and the memory networks are reorganized. This event plays an important role in transferring information from the hippocampus to cortical regions and opens a new space for new memories in the hippocampus. That’s also one of the reasons why sleep is very important for long-term memory. The people who experience sleep problems tend to experience memory problems more, and this is one of the reasons behind this.

As a result of these, we start remembering our episodic memories through cortical-cortical connections/activations rather than cortical-hippocampus connections/activations. This is called memory consolidation. Some researchers suggest that it may take somewhere between 1 and 10 years for memories to be consolidated from the hippocampus to cortical regions.

This might also be the reason why a person whose hippocampus is damaged today may not remember episodic memories that were created 6 months ago, while they could remember episodic memories that were created 30 years ago, because those episodic memories may have been consolidated into other brain regions, and the hippocampus no longer plays a strong role in retrieving them. As a result, damage to the hippocampus does not significantly impact those memories, while it impacts the episodic memories created a short time ago because these memories are not consolidated yet.

However, just like there are researchers who argue that the importance of the hippocampus in remembering episodic memories decreases over time and reaches zero after some point in life, there are also researchers who argue that the hippocampus plays a role in long-term memory throughout our entire lifetime. It seems like there is still no consensus about this.

Although I was previously aware of it, another key point I read and paid more attention to was the fact that memory encoding and retrieval are not too separate mechanisms. On a high level, encoding happens when we first experience some events, while retrieval (remembering a specific event) happens when some of the neurons that were activated during the memory encoding are reactivated later. In other words, even though we call it “remembering” or “memory retrieval” when we remember something, there is nothing that is retrieved from somewhere. Some specific neurons that were activated when we experience something for the first time are reactivated, and that reactivation makes us experience the feeling of “remembering”.